#LyX 2.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\begin_preamble
\input{preamble}
\end_preamble
\use_default_options true
\begin_modules
eqs-within-sections
figs-within-sections
tabs-within-sections
theorems-ams
\end_modules
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language american
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "default" "default"
\font_sans "cmbr" "default"
\font_typewriter "default" "default"
\font_math "iwona-math" "auto"
\font_default_family sfdefault
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures true
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\float_placement H
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref true
\pdf_bookmarks true
\pdf_bookmarksnumbered false
\pdf_bookmarksopen true
\pdf_bookmarksopenlevel 1
\pdf_breaklinks false
\pdf_pdfborder true
\pdf_colorlinks false
\pdf_backref section
\pdf_pdfusetitle true
\papersize a4paper
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 0
\use_minted 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip medskip
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Section*
Foreword
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
MAKRO is a large, empirically based macroeconomic model of the Danish economy.
 The purpose of the model is to serve as a tool for medium and long-term
 projections, short and long-run policy impact assessment, and long-run
 fiscal policy sustainability measurement.
 In addition, the model can incorporate short-term economic forecasts into
 its projections.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The model is developed by the MAKRO model group at 
\begin_inset CommandInset href
LatexCommand href
name "DREAM (Danish Research Institute for Economic Analysis and Modelling)"
target "https://dreamgruppen.dk/"
literal "false"

\end_inset

 for use by the Danish Ministry of Finance.
 The model code is made 
\begin_inset CommandInset href
LatexCommand href
name "freely available"
target "https://github.com/DREAM-DK/MAKRO"
literal "false"

\end_inset

, however, and may be used by anyone.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The model parameters, equations, and data as a whole have been selected
 such that the short and long-run properties are as empirically and theoreticall
y well-founded as possible.
 MAKRO incorporates four types of economic agents: households, firms, the
 government, and foreign agents demanding Danish exports.
 The model is micro-founded and forward-looking, with the behavior of households
 and firms supported by a detailed specification of their objective functions,
 preferences, technology, and budget sets.
 The government's behavior follows a set of exogenous rules as is standard,
 and the demand for exports is determined by a demand function that incorporates
 aspects of different trade models.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
MAKRO is a New-Keynesian model, but differs from so-called DSGE models in
 a few ways.
 DSGE models solve for optimal decisions, which are functions of state variables
 and contain information pertaining to the model's stochastic nature.
 These optimal decision functions are defined in a neighborhood of the model's
 steady state.
 MAKRO is instead a computational general equilibrium model that solves
 for a single path for all its variables.
 This solution relies on initial and terminal conditions and reflects all
 policy changes and variations in exogenous factors one wishes to study.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
MAKRO also differs from other models of its type due to its size.
 The household side of the model solves a model of overlapping generations,
 each with a life cycle of 100 years.
 The firm side of the model currently solves for nine different sectors
 of the economy.
 It is a nonlinear model with a large number of endogenous variables, and
 as a professional planning and budgeting tool, the model's variables must
 correspond precisely to their counterparts in the data.
 One of the primary purposes of MAKRO is to characterize the government
 budget balance and how it responds to shocks and policy changes.
 This requires a considerable disaggregation of the fiscal part of the model
 as it must be able to evaluate a large number of tax and transfer interventions
 as well as specific government consumption changes.
 
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
